Create main developer guide for Python (#11235)
rapidsai/cudf: docs/cudf/source/developer_guide/developer_guide.md

# Developer Guide

```{note}
At present, this guide only covers the main cuDF library.
In the future, it may be expanded to also cover dask_cudf, cudf_kafka, and custreamz.
```

> The cuDF library is a GPU-accelerated, [Pandas-like](https://pandas.pydata.org/) DataFrame library.

Reviewer: Later on you just use `cuDF` rather than "The cuDF library". Maybe start with that here?
```suggestion
cuDF is a GPU-accelerated, [pandas-like](https://pandas.pydata.org/) DataFrame library.
```

(pandas is I think canonically lowercase)

Under the hood, all of cuDF's functionality relies on the CUDA-accelerated `libcudf` C++ library.
Thus, cuDF's internals are designed to efficiently and robustly map pandas APIs to `libcudf` functions.
For more information about the `libcudf` library, a good starting point is the
[developer guide](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/blob/main/cpp/docs/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md).

This document assumes familiarity with the
[overall contributing guide](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).
The goal of this document is to provide more specific guidance for Python developers.
It covers the structure of the Python code and discusses best practices.
Additionally, it includes longer sections on more specific topics like testing and benchmarking.
More specific information on these can be found in the pages below:

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1

library_design
```

> The rest of this document focuses on a higher-level overview of best practices in cuDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of this document focuses on a high-level overview of best practices in cuDF.
```

## Directory structure and file naming

cuDF generally presents the same importable modules and subpackages as pandas.
All Cython code is contained in `python/cudf/cudf/_lib`.

> **Open question**: Should we start enforcing a stricter file/directory layout? Any suggestions?

Reviewer 2: Coming in cold, probably

1. Layouts that can be enforced by linting rules
2. Layouts that avoid messy dependency chains (`/foo` only imports from `_lib`)

would probably be good start with. In my experience, soft conversions of structure without linting enforcement just tend to stray overtime

Author: I don't disagree with you there. This also came up in [the test discussion](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/pull/11199#discussion_r918283574), and it's a problem anywhere. Do you have any suggestions on what kind of layouts would be enforceable? I would love that if we could come up with something. CC @shwina

Reviewer 2: Spitballing simple ones I can think of would be:

1. Mentioned in https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/pull/11199#discussion_r918283152=, if the doc structure could match test structure (the rst parsing would be a little heavy though)
2. If `cudf/tests/**/` could mirror the structure of `cudf/**` directory without the test directory.

The weakness in both would be where to place integration tests that utilize multiple APIs together.

## Code style

> cuDF employs a number of linters to ensure consistent style across the code base:

Reviewer: Does it make sense to flag `pre-commit` up front? This list is informational, but configuring each thing "by hand" is  basically not recommended.

Reviewer: Looks good, thanks.

  In conjunction with [type hints](https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html),
  `mypy` can help catch various bugs that are otherwise difficult to find.
- [`pydocstyle`](https://github.com/PyCQA/pydocstyle/) lints docstring style.

Configuration information for these tools is contained in a number of files.
The primary source of truth is the `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file at the root of the repo.
As described in the
[overall contributing guide](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md),
we recommend using [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/) to manage all linters.

## Deprecating and removing code

cuDF generally follows the policy of deprecating code for one release prior to removal.
For example, if we decide to remove an API during the 22.08 release cycle,
it will be marked as deprecated in the 22.08 release and removed in the 22.10 release.
All internal usage of deprecated APIs in cuDF should be removed when the API is deprecated.
This prevents users from encountering unexpected deprecation warnings when using other (non-deprecated) APIs.
The documentation for the API should also be updated to reflect its deprecation.

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.

Author: Hmm that's an interesting question that I haven't considered. Do you think it's worth having a checklist with the items listed here (make sure all calling code is updated, remove tests, etc)?

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.

Reviewer: I had a look to see how often APIs are deprecated, which is with some regularity. At the moment it doesn't look like there is consistency on whether a tracking issue is created for their subsequent removal. I suspect because that requirement was not previously clearly defined.

While there's a `deprecation` label, it is not consistently applied (there are 24 PRs tagged with deprecation but only 8 issues).

I think an issue template would help with remembering to fill in the issue. I suppose one could even have an automation that enforces that deprecation PRs are linked to by a deprecation issue before merge (but that needs more scripting...).

Maybe something simple like:

```
---
name: Deprecated API tracker
about: Create a tracking issue for removal of a deprecated API
title: "[DEP]"
labels: "deprecation"
assignees: ''

---

** Tracking issue for removal of `FILL_IN_API_CALL`, deprecated in `PR-NUMBER`

- [ ] Calling code removed
- [ ] Tests removed
- [ ] Documentation updated

```

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.

Author: I am both the person who originally suggested this requirement, and the most frequent violator of it. In hindsight, I am wondering whether this requirement is actually useful. In practice, I have instead been operating using a different strategy. Since our deprecation cycle is a single release, as part of the release cycle I basically do a post-portem search for `FutureWarning` and delete. Do you think that is sufficient, as opposed to the overhead of creating many issues?

CC @shwina @bdice who were involved in the original discussions when I proposed using a label for deprecations.

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.

Reviewer 3: > Since our deprecation cycle is a single release, as part of the release cycle I basically do a post-portem search for `FutureWarning` and delete. Do you think that is sufficient, as opposed to the overhead of creating many issues?

I agree the requirement to create an issue is unnecessary and too much overhead/churn. We sometimes let deprecations slip for 2 releases if we don't have time to rip them out, and that's okay too. We have been in a good habit of keeping things moving from deprecation to removal and I wouldn't over-codify this at present.

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.

Reviewer 4: Agreed with @bdice

The GitHub issue should be labeled "deprecation" and added to the next release’s project board.
If necessary, the removal timeline can be discussed on this issue.
Upon removal this issue may be closed.
Additionally, when removing an API, make sure to remove all tests and documentation.

Deprecation messages should follow these guidelines:
- Emit a FutureWarning.
- Use a single line (no newline characters)
- Indicate a replacement API, if any exists.
  Deprecations are an opportunity to show users better ways to do things.
- Don't specify a version when removal will occur.
  This gives us more flexibility.

For example:
```python
warnings.warn(
    "`Series.foo` is deprecated and will be removed in a future version of cudf. "
    "Use `Series.new_foo` instead.",
    FutureWarning
)
```

```{warning}

> Deprecations should be signaled using a `FutureWarning` **not a `DeprecationWarning`**!

Reviewer 2: Can add a pre-commit rule for this probably in the future

Author: Ooh good idea.

Author: Created #11251

`DeprecationWarning` is hidden by default except in code run in the `__main__` module.
```

## `pandas` compatibility

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Author: What do you mean by that? Something like "A given version of cuDF will be compatible with the latest version of pandas as of that cuDF release"?

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Author: CC @shwina for thoughts on what exactly we should promise

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Reviewer: > What do you mean by that? Something like "A given version of cuDF will be compatible with the latest version of pandas as of that cuDF release"?

That's kind of what I had in mind. I guess that the deprecation cycle is probably faster than in pandas (though I don't know)

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Author: Our deprecation cycle is typically much faster than pandas is, yes. We don't promise SemVer-style API stability. On the specific topic of pandas compatibility, I really don't think we promise anything other than what I stated in my sentence: each version of cuDF aims for compatibility with the latest version of pandas. That includes edge case behaviors that aren't really API promises in pandas but are things that we test for or users ask us about. I'll let Ashwin chime in on what wording we should use, but I definitely think something like this is worth adding.

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps we should only attempt to match behaviour for the *latest" version of Pandas we support? @galipremsagar has much more experience here.

> Maintaining compatibility with the pandas API is a primary goal of cuDF.

Reviewer 5: > Perhaps we should only attempt to match behavior for the *latest" version of Pandas we support?

+1, that is what we do currently.

Developers should always look at pandas APIs when adding a new feature to cuDF.
However, there are occasionally good reasons to deviate from pandas behavior.

The most common reasons center around performance.
Some APIs cannot match pandas behavior exactly without incurring exorbitant runtime costs.
Others may require using additional memory, which is always at a premium in GPU workflows.
If you are developing a feature and believe that perfect pandas compatibility is infeasible or undesirable,
you should consult with other members of the team to assess how to proceed.

When such a deviation from pandas behavior is necessary, it should be documented.

> For more information on how to do that, see [link to documentation#Comparing to pandas].

Author: Ah yes thanks. This requires #11217 to be merged first.

- [`flake8`](https://github.com/pycqa/flake8) checks for general code formatting compliance. 
- [`black`](https://github.com/psf/black) is an automatic code formatter.
  Code formatted with `black` is largely `flake8`-compliant, although there are a few minor issues that it cannot fix automatically.
- [`isort`](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) ensures imports are sorted consistently.
- [`mypy`](http://mypy-lang.org/) performs static type checking.
  In conjunction with [type hints](https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html),
  `mypy` can help catch various bugs that are otherwise difficult to find.
- [`pydocstyle`](https://github.com/PyCQA/pydocstyle/) lints docstring style.

Configuration information for these tools is contained in a number of files.
The primary source of truth is the `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file at the root of the repo.
As described in 
[overall contributing guide](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md),
we recommend using [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/) to manage all linters.

## Deprecating and removing code

cuDF generally follows the policy of deprecating code for one release prior to removal.

> For example, if we want to remove an API after the 22.06 release, it will be marked as deprecated in the 22.08 release.

Reviewer 3: The mention of 22.06 is confusing. Maybe “if we decide to remove an API during the 22.08 development cycle, it will be deprecated in the 22.08 release and removed in the 22.10 release.”

The code may then be removed in the 22.10 release.

> All usage of deprecated APIs within cuDF should be removed when the API is deprecated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All internal usage of deprecated APIs in cuDF should be removed when the API is deprecated.
```

> This prevents us from surfacing unexpected warnings to users of other APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This prevents unexpected warnings from surfacing when other (non-deprecated) APIs are called.
```

The documentation for the API should also be updated to reflect its deprecation.

> When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding Github issue to track the API's removal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When deprecating an API, developers should open a corresponding GitHub issue to track the API removal.
```

> The GitHub issue should be labeled “deprecation” and added to the next release’s project board.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The GitHub issue should be labeled "deprecation" and added to the next release's project board.
```

If necessary, the removal timeline can be discussed on this issue.
Upon removal this issue may be closed.
Additionally, when removing an API, make sure to remove all tests and documentation.

Deprecation messages should follow these guidelines:

> - Throw a FutureWarning.

Reviewer 3: It’s not really a throw/raise because it doesn’t halt execution.
```suggestion
- Emit a `FutureWarning`.
```

- Use a single line (no newline characters)
- Indicate a replacement API, if any exists.
  Deprecations are an opportunity to show users better ways to do things.

> - Don’t specify a version when removal will occur.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Don't specify a version when removal will occur.
```

  This gives us more flexibility.

For example:
```python
warnings.warn(
    "`Series.foo` is deprecated and will be removed in a future version of cudf. "
    "Use `Series.new_foo` instead.",
    FutureWarning
)
```

```{warning}
Deprecations should be signaled using a `FutureWarning` **not a `DeprecationWarning`**!

> `DeprecationWarning` is intended for Python's internal deprecations, not for application or library developers

Reviewer 3: Can you cite where you’re pulling this from? I have seen the difference described differently. It’s not about whether the warning comes from Python’s internals, but whether the target audience is developers or application users. https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html

Author: The best description is probably in the [original PEP that changed the recommended warnings](https://peps.python.org/pep-0565/#additional-use-case-for-futurewarning). The wording that you're referring to is more canonical (it's what shows up in the Python documentation). In practice, though, the line between developers and application users in Python is blurry enough that the only people I've seen actually recommending the use of `DeprecationWarning` in the last few years is core Python developers (see e.g. https://discuss.python.org/t/pendingdeprecationwarning-is-really-useful/1038/18). For all third-party packages `FutureWarning` is generally the safer option since you never really know how your package will be used, unless it's explicitly a command-line tool like click.

In this case I don't think this line adds much either way. I'm going to change it to focus on the important point, which is that `FutureWarning` is shown by default.
